---
title:  "Remembering Ray"
excerpt: "You can customise this too!"
header:
  image: "/assets/posts/post-6.jpg"
  #caption: "Photo by Nicholas Kusuma on Unsplash"
  teaser: "/assets/posts/post-6.jpg"
categories: 
  - articles
tags:
  - tag2
---

Every year on the second day of May, the doors of 1/1 Bishop Lefroy Road are left ajar for ardent lovers of cinema and Satyajit Ray who is, perhaps, one of the greatest filmmakers we had and ever will. 

Born on 2nd May 1921, the man was a filmmaker, illustrator, lyricist, music producer, writer and the quintessential polymathic genius. 

From portraying feudalism, feminism and highlighting real life issues by means of the film in an era when Bollywood was busy portraying their leads romancing around a tree, like passionate environmentalists, to penning down Feluda, the first detective thriller series our nation had which still reigns as one of the best sellers in young adult’s literature. 

He was the first and only Indian film director to win an Oscar and has left an impact not only on the Indian filmmakers & the society at large but also influenced the likes of Christopher Nolan, Martin Scorsese and Ralph Fiennes. His original composition was used by Wes Anderson in his film, ‘the Darjeeling Limited.’ Being a recipient of thirty two national film awards, ‘Hommage à Satyajit Ray’ at Cannes, Legion of Honour by the French President, an honorary Oscar and being included in the list of top directors multiple times. 

The fact that prodigious polymath has created films which has and still continues to influence great minds all over the world while being commercially successful is a feat in itself. 

However, the prodigal ‘Manik Da’, as he was lovingly called by his closed associates and a name which still remains respected in international film societies, first tried his hand at writing about films long before he began to make them. In an issue for the Statesman in 1948, he wrote in a piece titled - “What is Wrong with Indian Cinema?” The very piece questioned why a nation which hadn’t failed to produce excellent paintings, poetry and music would shy away from producing films of quality when ‘the raw material of life is cinema itself.’

Apart from his contributions to films he was also a writer in both, Bengali and English, specialising in Whodunnit and science fiction which were targeted towards a younger audience. A man who was known as one of the best graphic designers of the time and wearing the hat of an editor of a highly successful magazine for several years. 

Satyajit Ray is a fine example of how our nation has an abundance of art and artists, of how an artist may succumb to mere mortality but the art they create and the legacy they leave behind shall always be immortal. On his birth anniversary, lovers of art, cinema and literature pay our respects to one of the greatest our nation ever had.
